## Notes on the videos
<br />

<details>
<summary>Video: 1 - Introduction to AWS</summary>
<br />

AWS stands for 'Amazon Web Services'. There are many services, but you don't have to know all of them. We are going to use 
- Compute: EC2 (virtual servers in the cloud)
- Storage
- Networking & Content Delivery: VPC (e.g. firewalls)
- Security, Identity & Compliance: IAM
- Containers

### AWS Account and Services Scope
The *global* scope (AWS account, IAM users, Billing, Route53) is divided into *regions* (S3, VPC, DynamoDB), which themselves are divided into *availability zones* (physical datacenters running the virtual machines: e.g. EC2, EBS, RDS).

All AWS services are created in one oth these 3 scopes.

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 2 - Create an AWS account</summary>
<br />

Open the [AWS registration page](https://portal.aws.amazon.com/billing/signup), fill in the form and follow the instructions.

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 3 - IAM - Manage Users, Roles and Permissions</summary>
<br />

IAM stands for Identity and Access Management. The IAM service lets you manage who has access to your services. You define users or user groups and assign them certain permissions.

When you create an AWS account you have a root user by default with unlimited privileges. So we first should create an admin user with only those privileges needed to create an EC2 instance, deploy applications on it, etc. 

We need an admin user who has privileges to create other users and roles, also system users (like jenkins). Groups can be used to manage the permissions of several users who all have the same permissions.\
If you want to give a service permissions to do something, you cannot directly assign privileges to a service. You have to create a role, assign the privileges to that role, and then assign the role to the service. Each service must have its own role though. You cannot assign the same role to multiple services.

### Creating an Admin User
Open the "Services" dialog (link on the top left), click the filter "All services" and select "Security, Identity & Compliance" > "IAM" > "Access Management" > "Users". Press the "Add users" button and enter a name (e.g. 'admin'). Check the optional "Provide user access to the AWS Management Console" checkbox. Select the radio buttons "I want to create an IAM user" and "Autogenerated password". Check "Users must create a new password at next sign-in" as recommended. Press the "Next" button.

Choose "Attach policies directly" and select the "AdministratorAccess" policy. Press the "Next" button. On the summary page press "Create user". Copy the console sign-in URL, the username and password and save it in your password manager. You may also download a .csv file containing the credentials.

With these credentials the admin user has access to the web console. To provide him also programmatic access from a command line, you need to generate an access key ID and a secret access key. But first log out as root user and login again as the new admin user. Open the console sign-in URL (the account ID should be filled out automatically, otherwise you'll find it in the information you got when creating the AWS account) and enter username and password. On first login you'll have to change the password. Do it and don't forget to update the password in the password manager.

#### Generate an Access key
Go to the users list, click on the new admin user, select the "Security credentials" tab, scroll down to "Access keys" and press the "Create access key" button. Select "Command line interface (CLI)" and check the "I understand the above recommendation and want to proceed to create an access key" checkbox. Press "Next". You may enter a description. Press "Create access key". Copy access key and secret access key, store them in your password manager and download the .csv file. Press "Done".

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 4 - Regions and Availability Zones</summary>
<br />

AWS data centers are clustered in 30 regions. Each region has multiple availability zones used for replication. Whenever you create a new service you have to choose a region this service should be allocated in.

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 5 - VPC - Manage Private Network on AWS</summary>
<br />

VPC stands for Virtual Private Cloud. Each region has its VPC. Each availability zone is in a subnet of the region's VPC. Each service you are starting has to be running inside a VPC. Subnets are either private (you configured firewall rules that block all the traffic from outside the VPC) or public (you firewall rules allow access from outside the VPC). Inside the VPC your service (e.g. webserver) in a public subnet can access other services (e.g. database) inside a private subnet.

Services may get two IP addresses, a private one for internal communication inside the VPC, and a public one to make it accessible from the internet.

Access can be configured on subnet level, or on service component level. On subnet level so called NACLs (Network Access Control Lists) are used. On instance level it is done in Security Groups. 

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 6 - CIDR Blocks explained</summary>
<br />

CIDR stands for Classless Inter-Domain Routing. It specifies a subnet range. 172.31.0.0/16 for example defines an IP range starting from the IP address 172.31.0.0 and ending with 172.31.255.255. The first 16 bits (172.31.) are fixed and the rest can be changed. 

**Links:** 
- [IP Calculator](https://jodies.de/ipcalc?host=10.0.0.0&mask1=16&mask2=)
- [Subnet Calculator](https://mxtoolbox.com/subnetcalculator.aspx)
- [Subnet Divider](https://www.davidc.net/sites/default/subnets/subnets.html)

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 7 - Introduction to EC2 Virtual Cloud Server</summary>
<br />

EC2 stands for Elastic Compute Cloud. It is a virtual server providing compute capacity.

As an instructive example, we deploy a web application on an EC2 instance. This includes the following steps:
- Create an EC2 instance on AWS
- Connect to EC2 instance with ssh
- Install Docker on remote EC2 instance
- Run Docker container (docker login, pull, run) from private repository
- Configure EC2 Firewall to access application externally from the browser

### Create an EC2 instance on AWS
Go to "Services" > "Compute" > "EC2". Scroll down to the "Launch instance" section, press the "Launch instance" button and select "Launch instance". This leads you to a page where you can configure the new instance.

Enter a name (e.g. web-server) and the "Add additional tags" link. Press the "Add tag" button and enter the key-value-pair "Type" -> "web-server-with-docker".

Scroll down to "Application and OS Images (Amazon Machine Image)" and select the machine image "Amazon Linux". Next you can select from a large list of instance types. Select the free tier eligible "t2.micro".

To be able to ssh into the EC2 server we have to generate a key pair. We don't to it on our local machine and copy the public key to the server, but create the key pair on AWS and download the private key. The public key is automatically stored in the right place. Key pairs can be shared among different EC2 instances. Scroll down to "Key pair (login)" and click the "Create new key pair" link. Enter the name 'docker-server', select "RSA" and ".pem" and press the "Create key pair" button. The `docker-server.pem` file holding the private key is automatically downloaded.

In the "Network settings" section we could choose a VPC and a subnet (availability zone), but we leave the defaults unchanged. Make sure "Auto-assign public IP" is enabled. Select "Create security group", change the security group name to 'security-group-docker-server' and the description accordingly, leave the ssh firewall rule unchanged but modify the source type from "Anywhere" to "My IP".

Leave the defaults in the "Configure storage section" unchanged.

In the summary column on the right you could change the number of instances to be created, but we leave it at the default value of 1. Press the "Launch instance" button.

### Connect to EC2 Instance
Move the downloaded 'docker-server.pem' file into the ssh folder `~/.ssh` and restrict the file permissions 'read for you only': `chmod 400 ~/.ssh/docker-server.pem`.

Open the AWS web console, go to "EC2 Dashboard" > "Instances" and check the 'web-server' instance. Select the "Networking" tab below and copy the public IPv4 address.

Now open a terminal on your local machine and ssh into the EC2 server as 'ec2-user':\
`ssh -i ~/.ssh/docker-server.pem ec2-user@<public-ip-address>`.

### Install Docker on EC2
Execute the following commands on the EC2 terminal:
```sh
sudo yum update
sudo yum install docker
sudo service docker start
# add the ec2-user to the docker group 
# to avoid having to use sudo for every docker command
sudo usermod -aG docker ec2-user
# the last command will be effective only after a re-login
exit
```

### Run Webapplication on EC2
Go to the react-nodejs-example application (in the sample-applications folder or clone it from [GitHub](https://github.com/nanuchi/react-nodejs-example)) and build a Docker image, login to DockerHub and push the image to your private Docker registry:
```sh
docker build -t elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-react-nodjs-1.0 .
docker login
docker push elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-react-nodjs-1.0
```

*****
**Personal Note**
 Because my local machine has an Apple M2 processor (arm64) and the EC2 virtual machine we just created has an amd64 processor, the usual 'docker build' command would create an image runnable on arm64 only. So I would either have to slightly modify the Dockerfile and replace 'FROM node:10' with 'FROM --platform=linux/amd64 node:10' or I can use [docker buildx](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/buildx/) to build images for specific platforms:
```sh
docker buildx create --use
docker login
docker buildx build --platform linux/amd64,linux/arm64 -t elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-react-nodjs-1.0 --push .
```
*****

Now switch back to the EC2 terminal, login to DockerHub, pull the image and start a container from it:
```sh
ssh -i ~/.ssh/docker-server.pem ec2-user@<public-ip-address>

docker login
docker pull --platform linux/amd64 elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-react-nodjs-1.0
docker run -d -p 3000:3080 elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-react-nodjs-1.0
```

### Make App accessible from the Browser
Open the AWS web console, go to "EC2 Dashboard" > "Instances" and check the 'web-server' instance. Select the "Security" tab below and click on the link for the 'security-group-docker-server'. Open the "Inbound rules" tab and press the "Edit inbound rules" button. Press "Add rule" and enter a rule of type "Custom TCP" for port 3000 with source "Anywhere IPv4". Press "Save rules".

Now open the browser and navigate to `http://<ec2-public-ip>:3000` to see the application in action.

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 8, 9, 10 - Deploy to EC2 Server from Jenkins Pipeline</summary>
<br />

## Deploy an Application by Manually Starting a Docker Container
After having built a Docker image containing our application and pushed it to a Docker repository, we are ready to deploy it on a server. In the deploy stage of the Jenkins pipeline we ssh into an EC2 server and execute a docker run command to pull the image and start a container running the application. To be able to do that, we have to install an SSH agent plugin and create according credentials.

### Install SSH Agent Plugin and Create SSH Credentials
Login to the Jenkins management web console and install the "SSH Agent" plugin. Then open the multibranch pipeline ("Dashboard" > "devops-bootcamp-multibranch-pipeline"), open the pipeline specific "Credentials", scroll down to "Stores scoped to devops-bootcamp-multibranch-pipeline" and click on the devops-bootcamp-multibranch-pipeline link and then on the "Global credentials (unrestricted)" link. Press the "Add credentials" button, select the kind "SSH Username with private key", enter an ID (e.g. ec2-server-key), the username 'ec2-user', select "Private Key" > "Enter directly", press the "Add" button and paste the content of the `~/.ssh/docker-server.pem` file you downloaded from the EC2 server. (To copy the content on a mac without having to display it on the terminal, use `pbcopy < ~/.ssh/docker-server.pem`.) Press the "Create" button.

### Add Deploy Stage to Jenkinsfile
To find out how to use the SSH Agent plugin in a Jenkinsfile, we go back to the multibranch pipeline project and click on the item "Pipeline Syntax" in the left menu. Select "sshagent: SSH Agent" in the Sample Step dropdown. The "ec2-user" is already selected (since it is the only SSH credentials username we have). Press the "Generate Pipeline Script" button and copy the example snippet.

Now open the Jenkinsfile in the application project, which is built in the multibranch pipeline (java-maven-app) and add the following stage:
```groovy
stage('Deploy Application') {
    steps {
        script {
            echo 'deploying Docker image to EC2 server...'
            def dockerCmd = "docker run -d -p 8000:8080 elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-java-maven-app-${IMAGE_TAG}"
            sshagent(['ec2-server-key']) {
                sh "ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no ec2-user@<ec2-public-ip> ${dockerCmd}"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The option `-o StrictHostKeyChecking=no` is necessary to avoid ssh asking whether the server should be added to the known hosts.

### Comfigure EC2
To make this work, two more things have to be done on the EC2 server:
- To allow Jenkins to ssh into the EC2 server, we have to add the IP address of the Jenkins host (droplet) to the firewall rule restricting access via port 22.
- To allow EC2 to pull a Docker image from our private repository on DockerHub, we have to login from EC2 to DockerHub once. This will create an entry in `/home/ec2-user/.docker/config.json` and keep the ec2-user logged in.

And to allow accessing the application from the internet, we have to add a firewall rule opening the port 8000 from anywhere.

## Use Docker Compose for Deployment
Usually applications do not consist of just one Docker container. As soon as multiple containers have to be managed it is easier to do that using Docker Compose. So instead of executing `docker run` commands on the deployment server, a `docker-compose.yaml` file is part of the application project (in the Git repository), copied to the deployment server and executed using Docker Compose. This section shows how to do this from a Jenkins pipeline.

### Install Docker Compose on EC2
Download Docker Compose:\
`sudo curl -SL https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/download/v2.17.2/docker-compose-linux-x86_64 -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose`

Make the docker-compose command executable:\
`sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose`

Test the installation:\
`docker-compose --version`

### Create a Docker Compose File
Add a file called `docker-compose.yaml` with the following content to the 'java-maven-app' project:
```yaml
version: '3.9'
services:
  java-maven-app:
    image: elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-java-maven-app-${IMAGE_TAG}
    ports:
      - 8000:8080

  postgres:
    image: postgres:13
    ports:
      - 5432:5432
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD:my-pwd
```
The second service (container) postgres is added just for demonstration purposes.

### Adjust Jenkinsfile
Adjust the deploy stage of the application's Jenkinsfile to the following content:
```groovy
stage('Deploy Application') {
    steps {
        script {
            echo 'deploying Docker image to EC2 server...'
            def dockerComposeCmd = "IMAGE_TAG=${IMAGE_TAG} docker-compose -f docker-compose.yaml up -d"
            sshagent(['ec2-server-key']) {
                sh 'scp -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no docker-compose.yaml ec2-user@<ec2-public-ip>:/home/ec2-user'
                sh "ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no ec2-user@<ec2-public-ip> ${dockerComposeCmd}"
            }
        }
    }
}
```
Commit and push the changes to the Git repository and start the build pipeline on Jenkins.

### Extract the Logic to a Shell Script
Add a shell script called `server-cmds.sh` with the following content to the application project:
```sh
#!/usr/bin/env/ bash

export IMAGE_TAG=$1
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yaml up -d
echo "successfully started the containers using docker-compose"
```

Adjust the deploy stage of the application's Jenkinsfile to the following content:
```groovy
stage('Deploy Application') {
    steps {
        script {
            echo 'deploying Docker image to EC2 server...'
            def shellCmd = "bash ./server-cmds.sh ${IMAGE_TAG}"
            sshagent(['ec2-server-key']) {
                sh 'scp -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no server-cmds.sh docker-compose.yaml ec2-user@<ec2-public-ip>:/home/ec2-user'
                sh "ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no ec2-user@<ec2-public-ip> ${shellCmd}"
            }
        }
    }
}
```
Commit and push the changes to the Git repository and start the build pipeline on Jenkins.

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 11 - Introduction to AWS CLI</summary>
<br />

Everything that can be done in the AWS web management console (UI) can be done via the AWS command line interface.

### Install and configure AWS CLI
Check the [Installation Guides](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html) for your platform.

On **Mac** computers just execute
```sh
brew update
brew install awscli
```

### Configure ASW CLI to connect to AWS account
We have to tell AWS CLI with which account and which user we want to connect. Get the file, that was downloaded when you created the access key for the admin user.

```sh
aws configure
  AWS Access Key ID [None]: ....
  AWS Secret Access Key [None]: ....
  Default region name [None]: eu-west-3 # Paris (eu-central-1 for Frankfurt)
  Default output format [None]: json
```

This configuration will be used for all subsequent AWS CLI commands. The configuration itself is stored in `~/.aws/config` and `~/.aws/credentials`.

### Command Structure
`aws <command> <subcommand> [options and parameters]`
- `<command>`: the AWS service (e.g. ec2, iam)
- `<subcommand>`: specifies which operation to perform

E.g. the command to create a new ec2 instance looks like this:
```sh
aws ec2 run-instances \
  --image-id ami-xxxxxxx \
  --count 1 \
  --instance-type t2.micro \
  --key-name MyKeyPair \
  --security-group-ids sg-xxxxxx \
  --subnet-id subnet-xxxxxx
```

### Create a Security Group
`aws ec2 describe-security-groups`: displays existing security groups
`aws ec2 describe-vpcs`: displays existing VPCs; we need the property "VpcId"

```sh
aws ec2 create-security-group \
  --group-name my-sg \
  --description "My Security Group" \
  --vpc-id vpc-04acd8f40d2f4b8e9
```
The output of this command is a JSON object holding the ID of the newly created security group.

#### Create a Firewall Rule
```sh
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress \
  --group-id sg-....... \
  --protocol tcp \
  --port 22 \
  --cidr 31.10.151.111/32
  ```

### Create a Key Pair
```sh
aws ec2 create-key-pair \
  --key-name MyKpCli \
  --query 'KeyMaterial' \
  --output text > MyKpCli.pem
```
To get information about possible option values, execute `aws ec2 create-key-pair help`. The first two lines would create a key pair and return a JSON object describing it. The private key is stored in the "KeyMaterial" attribute, so we can directly query the returned JSON object to just output the value of the "KeyMaterial" attribute and redirect it into a file called "MyKpCli.pem".

### Create an EC2 Instance
`aws ec2 describe-subnets`: lists all existing subnets; copy the subnet id of the first availability zone.\
Amazon image IDs can be found by `aws ec2 describe-images` but it is probably faster to open the management web console, start launching a new instance, select the required image and copy the ID starting with 'ami-'.

Now we have all the parameters needed to create an EC2 instance:
```sh
aws ec2 run-instances \
  --image-id ami-08722fffad032e569 \
  --count 1 \
  --instance-type t2.micro \
  --key-name MyKpCli \
  --security-group-ids sg-xxxxxx \
  --subnet-id subnet-xxxxxx
```

To get information about the new instance (like the public IP address), execute\
`aws ec2 describe-instances`

Before we can ssh into the new EC2 instance, we have to restrict read-permissions of the saved .pem file:\
`chmod 400 MyKpCli.pem`

And now:\
`ssh -i MyKpCli.pem ec2-user@<public-ec2-ip>`

### Filters and Query
When executing aws sub-commands that display information on components (e.g. describe sub-commands), we can add a 
- `--filters` option to pick only certain components (name-values, where name is any attribute name), and a
- `--query` option to pick specific attributes of the components.

Example:
```sh
aws ec2 describe-instances \
  --filters "Name=instance-type,Values=t2.micro" \
  --query "Reservations[].Instances[].InstanceId"

# query multiple attributes
aws ec2 describe-instances \
  --filters "Name=instance-type,Values=t2.micro" \
  --query "Reservations[].Instances[].{ID:InstanceId, ImageId:ImageId}"

# just using query (with pattern matching)
aws ec2 describe-instances \
  --query 'Reservations[].Instances[?InstanceType==`t2.micro`].InstanceId'

# filtering multiple values
aws ec2 describe-instances \
  --filters "Name=instance-id,Values=ami-x0123456,ami-y0123456,ami-z0123456" \
  --query "Reservations[].Instances[].InstanceId"

# filtering for certain tags
aws ec2 describe-instances \
  --filters "Name=tag:Type,Values=web-server-with-docker" \
  --query "Reservations[].Instances[].InstanceId"
```

Note that the attribute name used in the `--filtering` option is written in lower case with hyphens instead of camel-case, so InstanceType is written as instance-type.

### Using the IAM Command to Create Users, Groups and Assign Permissions
**Create a User Group:**\
`aws iam create-group --group-name MyGroupCli`

This returns a JSON object describing the newly created group. ARN stands for 'Amazon Resource Name'. It is a unique ID for AWS components.

**Create a User:**\
`aws iam create-user --user-name MyUserCli`

**Add user to group:**\
`aws iam add-user-to-group --user-name MyUserCli --group-name MyGroupCli`

**Display group information:**\
`aws iam get-group --group-name MyGroupCli`

**Get the ARN of the AmazonEC2FullAccess policy:**\
`aws iam list-policies --query 'Policies[?PolicyName==`AmazonEC2FullAccess`].Arn'`

**Attach policy to group:**\
`aws iam attach-group-policy --group-name MyGroupCli --policy-arn <policy-arn>`\
`aws iam list-attached-group-policies --group-name MyGroupCli`

### Create Credentials for new User
**Create a password for UI login:**
```sh
aws iam create-login-profile \
  --user-name MyUserCli \
  --password TopSecretInitialPassword123 \
  --password-reset-required
```

In order to login as the new 'MyUserCli' user we need the account ID. This number is part of the 'MyUserCli' user's ARN. `aws iam get-user --user-name MyUserCli` displays the user data where we find the ARN "arn:aws:iam::664574038682:user/MyUserCli" containing the account ID 664574038682.

To change the initial password on first login, the user needs the permission to do that. This permission is not part of the 'AmazonEC2FullAccess' policy. So we also have to add the 'IAMUserChangePassword' policy. Or we could create our own policy containing the required permission and assign that policy to the user group.

**Create a policy:**\
First create a JSON file with the following content (copied from the 'IAMUserChangePassword' policy looked up in the management web console under "IAM" > "Access management" > "Policies" > "IAMUserChangePassword", restricted to the user of our account only):
```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "iam:ChangePassword"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:iam::664574038682:user/${aws:username}"
            ]
        },
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "iam:GetAccountPasswordPolicy"
            ],
            "Resource": "*"
        }
    ]
}
```
Save the file as 'changePwdPolicy.json'. Now create the policy:\
`aws iam create-policy --policy-name changePwd --policy-document file://changePwdPolicy.json`

Copy the policy ARN and attach it to the user-group as before:\
`aws iam attach-group-policy --group-name MyGroupCli --policy-arn <policy-arn>`

**Create access key and access secret key for console login:**\
`aws iam create-access-key --user-name MyUserCli`

Copy the "AccessKeyId" and the "SecretAccessKey".

### Switch User for Executing AWS Commands
If you want to switch the user for executing aws commands, you can
- execute `aws configure` again (which also overwrites the region and output format)
- execute `aws configure set aws-access-key-id ...` and `aws configure set aws-secret_access-key ...`
- just temporarily set environment variables `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` (not changing the default user set by `aws configure`)

### Delete AWS Resources
To clean up your AWS account you can execute similar commands as the ones you used to create the components. To get a list of all delete-sub-commands that are available for a specific command, just execute\
`aws ec2 help | grep delete` or `aws iam help | grep delete` etc.

</details>

## Exercises
<br />

Your company decided that they will use AWS as a cloud provider to deploy their applications. It's too much overhead to manage multiple platforms, including the billing etc.

So you need to deploy the previous NodeJS application on an EC2 instance now. This means you need to create and prepare an EC2 server with the AWS Command Line Tool to run your NodeJS app container on it.

You know there are many steps to set this up, so you go through it with step by step exercises.

<details>
<summary>Exercise 1: Create IAM user</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

First of all, you need an IAM user with correct permissions to execute the tasks below.
- Create a new IAM user "your name" with "devops" user-group
- Give the "devops" group all needed permissions to execute the tasks below - with login and CLI credentials

Note: Do that using the AWS UI with Admin User

**Steps to solve the tasks:**

**Step 1:** Create a new user
- Open the browser and navigate to the [AWS Login Page](https://eu-north-1.signin.aws.amazon.com). Login as root user or, if already available, as admin user.
- Open the "Services" dialog (link on the top left), click the filter "All services" and select "Security, Identity & Compliance" > "IAM" > "Access Management" > "Users".
- Press the "Add users" button and enter the username 'fesi'.
- Check the optional "Provide user access to the AWS Management Console" checkbox. Select the radio buttons "I want to create an IAM user" and "Autogenerated password". Check "Users must create a new password at next sign-in" as recommended. Press the "Next" button.
- Choose "Add user to group" and press the "Create group" button in the section below.
- Enter the usergroup name 'devops'.
- Enter 'EC2Full' in the search field of the "Permissions policies" section below and select the permission "AmazonEC2FullAccess".
- Enter 'VPCFull' in the search field of the "Permissions policies" section below and select the permission "AmazonVPCFullAccess".
- Press the "Create user group" button at the bottom.
- Check the new "devops" user group in the "User groups" section and press the "Next" button.
- On the "Review and create" page press "Create user".
- Download the .csv file containing the login URL and credentials by pressing the "Download .csv file" button.

**Step 2:** Change password
- Logout as root/admin user.
- Login again as the new 'fesi' user. The sign-in URL and the initial password can be found in the downloaded .csv file.
- Change the initial password.
- Logout.

**Step 3:** Generate a secret access key
- Login again as root / admin.
- Go to the users list, click on the new 'fesi' user
- Select the "Security credentials" tab, scroll down to "Access keys" and press the "Create access key" button.
- Select "Command line interface (CLI)" and check the "I understand the above recommendation and want to proceed to create an access key" checkbox.
- Press "Next". Press "Create access key".
- On the "Retrieve access keys" page press the "Download the .csv file" button.
- Press "Done".

</details>

******

<details>
<summary>Exercise 2: Configure AWS CLI</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

You want to use the AWS CLI for the following tasks. So, to be able to interact with the AWS account from the AWS Command Line tool you need to configure it correctly:
- Set credentials for that user for AWS CLI
- Configure correct region for your AWS CLI

**Steps to solve the tasks:**

**Step 1:** Configure AWS CLI
```sh
aws configure
  AWS Access Key ID [None]: ****************LRGA # downloaded when creating the secret access key for 'fesi' user
  AWS Secret Access Key [None]: ************PQHr # downloaded when creating the secret access key for 'fesi' user
  Default region name [None]: eu-central-1 # Frankfurt
  Default output format [None]: json
```

</details>

******

<details>
<summary>Exercise 3: Create VPC</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

You want to create the EC2 Instance in a dedicated VPC, instead of using the default one. So you:
- create a new VPC with 1 subnet and
- create a security group in the VPC that will allow you access on ssh port 22 and will allow browser access to your Node application (using the AWS CLI)

**Steps to solve the tasks:**\
**Step 1:** Create a new VPC with one subnet
```sh
# create VPC
aws ec2 create-vpc \
  --cidr-block 10.0.0.0/24 \
  --query Vpc.VpcId \
  --output text
# => vpc-0d6389f901133c5b2

# create subnet in the VPC
aws ec2 create-subnet \
  --vpc-id vpc-0d6389f901133c5b2 \
  --cidr-block 10.0.0.32/28 \
  --availability-zone eu-central-1a \
  --query Subnet.SubnetId \
  --output text
# => subnet-08b0b65a552e2347a

# subnets of non default VPCs do not automatically assign a public IP address when launching EC2 instances
# we modify the subnet accordingly (alternatively we can add the --associate-public-ip-address option to the
# 'aws ec2 run-instances' command)
aws ec2 modify-subnet-attribute \
  --map-public-ip-on-launch \
  --subnet-id subnet-08b0b65a552e2347a
```

**Step 2:** Make the subnet public
```sh
# create internet gateway
aws ec2 create-internet-gateway \
  --query InternetGateway.InternetGatewayId \
  --output text
# => igw-0ae928c4a3842e5d5

# attach internet gateway to VPC
aws ec2 attach-internet-gateway \
  --vpc-id vpc-0d6389f901133c5b2 \
  --internet-gateway-id igw-0ae928c4a3842e5d5

# create a custom route table for the VPC
aws ec2 create-route-table \
  --vpc-id vpc-0d6389f901133c5b2 \
  --query RouteTable.RouteTableId \
  --output text
# => rtb-097d90cafaabb0005

# create route rule for handling all traffic between internet & VPC
aws ec2 create-route \
  --route-table-id rtb-097d90cafaabb0005 \
  --destination-cidr-block 0.0.0.0/0 \
  --gateway-id igw-0ae928c4a3842e5d5

# associate subnet with the route table to allow internet traffic in the subnet as well
aws ec2 associate-route-table \
  --route-table-id rtb-097d90cafaabb0005 \
  --subnet-id subnet-08b0b65a552e2347a
```

**Step 3:** Create security group in the VPC to allow access on port 22
```sh
# create security group
aws ec2 create-security-group \
  --group-name ssh-access \
  --description "Security group for SSH access" \
  --vpc-id vpc-0d6389f901133c5b2 \
  --query GroupId \
  --output text
# => sg-0a6a9345d15c51f5e

# add incoming access on port 22 from my IP address to security group
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress \
  --group-id sg-0a6a9345d15c51f5e \
  --protocol tcp \
  --port 22 \
  --cidr 31.10.151.3/32
```

</details>

******

<details>
<summary>Exercise 4: Create EC2 Instance</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

Once the VPC is created, you:
- Create an EC2 instance in that VPC
- with the security group you just created and ssh key file (using the AWS CLI)

**Steps to solve the tasks:**\
**Step 1:** Create an SSH key pair
```sh
# create key pair, save it locally in .pem file
aws ec2 create-key-pair \
  --key-name WebServerKeyPair \
  --query "KeyMaterial" \
  --output text > WebServerKeyPair.pem

# set stricter permission on on .pem file
chmod 400 WebServerKeyPair.pem
```

**Step 2:** Create an EC2 instance in our subnet
```sh
# create an EC2 instance with the above key, in our subnet and using the security group we created
aws ec2 run-instances \
  --image-id ami-0fa03365cde71e0ab \
  --count 1 \
  --instance-type t2.micro \
  --key-name WebServerKeyPair \
  --security-group-ids sg-0a6a9345d15c51f5e \
  --subnet-id subnet-08b0b65a552e2347a \
  --associate-public-ip-address \
  --query "Instances[].InstanceId" \
  --output text
# => i-0ff44d9f8f07fea75

# validate that EC2 instance is in a running state, and get its public ip address to connect via ssh
aws ec2 describe-instances \
  --instance-id i-0ff44d9f8f07fea75 \
  --query "Reservations[].Instances[].{State:State.Name,Address:PublicIpAddress}"
# => {
#        "State": "running",
#        "Address": "3.122.205.189"
#    }
```

</details>

******

<details>
<summary>Exercise 5: SSH into the server and install Docker and Docker-Compose on it</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

Once the EC2 instance is created successfully, you want to prepare the server to run Docker containers. So you:
- ssh into the server and
- install Docker and Docker-Compose on it to run the dockerized application later

**Steps to solve the tasks:**\
**Step 1:** SSH into EC2
```sh
ssh -i WebServerKeyPair.pem ec2-user@3.122.205.189
```

**Step 2:** Install Docker
```sh
# install Docker
sudo yum update -y
sudo yum install -y docker

# start docker service
sudo systemctl start docker 

# allow ec2-user to run docker commands without sudo by adding it to docker group
sudo usermod -aG docker ec2-user

# install docker compose
sudo curl -SL https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/download/v2.17.2/docker-compose-linux-x86_64 -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose

sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose

# test the installation
docker-compose --version
```

</details>

******

### Set up Continuous Deployment

Now you don't want to deploy manually to the server all the time, because it's time-consuming and also sometimes you miss it, when changes are made and the new docker image is built by the pipeline. When you forget to check the pipeline, your team members need to write you and ask you to deploy the new version.

As a solution, you want to **automate** this thing to save you and your team members time and energy.

<details>
<summary>Exercise 6: Add docker-compose for deployment</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

First:
- add docker-compose to your NodeJS application

The reason is you want to have the whole configuration for starting the docker container in a file, in case you need to make changes to that, instead of a plain docker command with parameters. Also, in case you add a database later.

Use repository: https://github.com/elemasamuel/devops-bootcamp-node-project

**Steps to solve the tasks:**\
**Step 1:** Add docker-compose.yaml\
Add a file called `docker-compose.yaml` with the following content to the root folder of the NodeJS project:
```sh
version: '3.9'
services:
    nodejs-app:
      image: elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-node-project-${IMAGE_TAG}
      ports:
        - 3000:3000
```

</details>

******

<details>
<summary>Exercise 7: Add "deploy to EC2" step to your pipeline</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

- Complete the pipeline of the exercises in the previous module 08 ("Build Automation & CI/CD with Jenkins") by adding a deployment step for your previous NodeJS project with docker-compose.

**Steps to solve the tasks:**\
**Step 1:** Create SSH credentials in Jenkins
- Login to the Jenkins management web console and install the "SSH Agent" plugin if it isn't already installed.
- Open "Dashboard" > "Manage Jenkins" > "Manage Credentials" and click on the domain "(global)" in the "Stores scoped to Jenkins" section.
- Press the "Add credentials" button.
- Select the kind "SSH Username with private key", enter the ID 'ec2-server-key', the username 'ec2-user', select "Private Key" > "Enter directly", press the "Add" button and paste the content of the `WebServerKeyPair.pem` file you downloaded from the EC2 server. (To copy the content on a mac without having to display it on the terminal, use `pbcopy < WebServerKeyPair.pem`.) Press the "Create" button.

**Step 2:** Open port 22 on EC2 server from Jenkins IP\
To allow Jenkins to ssh into the EC2 server, we have to add the IP address of the Jenkins host (64.225.104.226) to the firewall rule restricting access via port 22.
```sh
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress \
  --group-id sg-0a6a9345d15c51f5e \
  --ip-permissions IpProtocol=tcp,FromPort=22,ToPort=22,IpRanges="[{CidrIp=64.225.104.226/32,Description='SSH access from Jenkins'}]"
```

**Step 3:** Login to Docker Hub\
To allow EC2 to pull a Docker image from our private repository on DockerHub, we have to login from EC2 to DockerHub once. This will create an entry in `/home/ec2-user/.docker/config.json` and keep the ec2-user logged in.
```sh
ssh -i WebServerKeyPair.pem ec2-user@3.122.205.189
docker login
  Username: elemasamuel
  Password: ***
  Login Succeeded
```

**Step 4:** Add deploy stage to Jenkinsfile\
Add the following snippets to the Jenkinsfile of the NodeJS project:
```groovy
pipeline {
    agent any

    parameters {
        booleanParam(name: 'deploy', defaultValue: true, description: 'Deploy the application on the EC2 server.') 
    }

    stages {
        ...
        stage('Build and Push Docker Image') {
            ...
        }
        stage('Deploy to EC2') {
            when {
                expression {
                    params.deploy
                }
            }
            steps {
                script {
                    echo 'deploying Docker image to EC2 server...'
                    
                    def dockerComposeCmd = "IMAGE_TAG=${IMAGE_VERSION} docker-compose up -d"
                    def ec2Instance = "ec2-user@3.122.205.189"

                    sshagent(['ec2-server-key']) {
                        sh "scp -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no docker-compose.yaml ${ec2Instance}:/home/ec2-user"
                        sh "ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no ${ec2Instance} ${dockerComposeCmd}"
                    }
                }
            }
        }
        stage('Commit Version Update') {
            ...
        }
    }
}
```

Commit and push the changes to the repository. Switch to Jenkins and trigger the "node-project-pipeline". Trigger it a second time clicking on "Build with Parameters" and checking the "deploy" flag to include the new deploy stage.

Switch to the EC2 instance (ssh into it) and check with `docker ps` whether the nodejs-app container is running. 

</details>

******

<details>
<summary>Exercise 8: Configure access from browser (EC2 Security Group)</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

After executing the Jenkins pipeline successfully, the application is deployed, but you still can't access it from the browser. Again, you need to open the correct port on the server. For that you:
- Configure EC2 security group to access your application from browser (using AWS CLI)

**Steps to solve the tasks:**\
**Step 1:** Open port 3000 in security group to make app accessible from all IP addresses
```sh
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress \
  --group-id sg-0a6a9345d15c51f5e \
  --protocol tcp \
  --port 3000 \
  --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
```

Now open a browser and navigate to [http://3.122.205.189:3000/](http://3.122.205.189:3000/) to see the application in action.

</details>

******

<details>
<summary>Exercise 9: Configure automatic triggering of multi-branch pipeline</summary>
<br />

**Tasks:**

Your team members are creating branches to add new features to the application or fix stuff, so you don't want to build and deploy all these half-done features or bug fixes. You want to build and deploy only the master branch. All other branches should only run tests. Add this logic to the Jenkinsfile.

- Add branch based logic to Jenkinsfile
- Add webhook to trigger pipeline automatically

**Steps to solve the tasks:**\
**Step 1:** Add branch based logic to Jenkinsfile\
Enhance the pipeline stages with a `when` expression evaluating the current branch:
```groovy
pipeline {
    agent any

    parameters {
        booleanParam(name: 'deploy', defaultValue: true, description: 'Deploy the application on the EC2 server.') 
    }

    stages {
        stage('Bump Version') {
            // only execute this stage for the master/main branch
            when {
                expression {
                    return env.GIT_BRANCH == "origin/main"
                }
            }
            steps {
                script {
                    bumpNpmVersion('app', 'patch')
                }
            }
        }
        stage('Run Tests') {
            // run the tests for every branch
            steps {
                script {
                    runNpmTests('app')
                }
            }
        }
        stage('Build and Push Docker Image') {
            // only execute this stage for the master/main branch
            when {
                expression {
                    return env.GIT_BRANCH == "origin/main"
                }
            }
            steps {
                buildAndPublishImage("elemasamuel/fesi-repo:devops-bootcamp-node-project-${IMAGE_VERSION}")
            }
        }
        stage('Deploy to EC2') {
            // only execute this stage for the master/main branch and if the respective flag is set
            when {
                expression {
                    return env.GIT_BRANCH == "origin/main" && params.deploy
                }
            }
            steps {
                ...
            }
        }
        stage('Commit Version Update') {
            // only execute this stage for the master/main branch
            when {
                expression {
                    return env.GIT_BRANCH == "origin/main"
                }
            }
            steps {
                ...
            }
        }
    }
}
```

**Step 2:** Add webhook on GitHub to trigger pipeline automatically\
Log in to your GitHub account, go to your project/repository page and open "Settings" > "Webhooks" and press the "Add webhook" button. Enter the "Payload URL" `http://64.225.104.226:8080/github-webhook/` (Jenkins) and press the "Add webhook" button.

**Step 3:** Configure Jenkins pipeline to trigger a build on GitHub webhook calls\
Since this is a simple pipeline project (not a multi-branch pipeline), it is sufficient to do the following: Go to the Jenkins admin web console and open the pipeline project (`node-project-pipeline`), open the configuration and scroll down to the "Build Triggers" section. Check the "GitHub hook trigger for GITScm polling" checkbox and press the "Save" button.

To prevent Jenkins from triggering a build upon automatic version bump commits by Jenkins itself, go to the pipeline configuration and scroll down to "Additional Behaviours" in the Git configuration. Click the "Add" dropdown and choose "Polling ignores commits from certain users" and enter the username of the committer to be ignored for triggering a build (`jenkins` in our case).

</details>

******


*****
